The ‘Chinese’ Practice of Averting Periodic Obstacles1
from the Words of the Buddha

pakpa jampal la chaktsal lo
Homage to Noble Mañjuśrī.

gyanak pö kak dok chejawa
This is “The ‘Chinese’ Practice of Averting Periodic Obstacles.”

pakpa kün la chaktsal lo
Homage to all noble ones.
rikjé kün gyi kyab tu sol
May the wise protect us.
chokpo kün la chaktsal lo
Homage to all excellent ones.
barnang lha yi kyab tu sol
May the gods of the sky protect us.
tsang rik lha la chaktsal lo
Homage to the gods of the abode of Brahmā.
kham sum si la wang gyurwa
To all who wield power over the three planes of existence,
kün la chaktsal chöpa bul
We pay homage and make offerings.
nyima tamché gewa yin
All days are virtuous.
gyukar tamché zangwa yin
All constellations are excellent.
sangye tamché dzutrul ché
All buddhas possess great magical powers.
denpé tsik ni didak gi
By the power of these words of truth,
dakchak küntu delek shok
May we always experience happiness and wellbeing.2

om vagishvari mum | om mani pemé hung | om badzrapani hung
oṃ vāgīśvari muṃ | oṃ maṇi-padme hūṃ | oṃ vajra-pāṇi hūṃ |
om mahe pel barma yé soha | om mahakali motayé soha | om akani nikani abiya mandale soha
oṃ mahe lady ablaze with glory ye svāhā | oṃ mahākāli moṭayé svāhā | oṃ akani nikani abhiya
maṇḍale svāhā |
om sindu sung shik | om duduna sung shik | om dardu sung shik | om tsuti sung shik | om duma
sung shik |  om prati sung shik | om suda dantri sung shik | om natsen sung shik | om sulakha
sung shik | om kalatri sung shik |
om tredu shedu sung shik | om khati sung shik | om thar thar sung shik | om mapa shayé sung
shik | om mara sung shik | om marik sung shik | om mati sung shik | om tane sung shik | om
bhata sung shik |
si sum gön gyi gyu | pi pi lingga ga jé la gi | trochu pen semchen mé né drub shik
tün dang mitün shi dang mi shi zuk lak mé né | dak gi lhé sung shik kyob shik
Everything favourable or unfavourable, auspicious or inauspicious, lies in the domain of astrology.
May the deities protect and guard us!3
om traktu treyé soha | om tre’u dok | om trak raksha dok | om mamakita dok | om masuraya dok
|
om a tsandrayé soha | om pupartayé soha | om priti shati soha | om mama ngota ngota yé soha
| om mama ram ram yé soha | om mama kara kara yé soha | om mama char chur yar yer soha | om
mama su su tam tam yé soha |
om yam yam sa la ge re du yé te khu che pé | shi shi yang du maha ram ram ge ra ca sa pé | ghadha
sengki shiva düna ma sa du yé ma ra da ke khang de du | ba ro si ma du hri | nakmo chem
kham du ah ah ma da pe rim | treng du ma ah ra khyer nay u | ah hung khyé sha na ma ma
ho | a pa sa ra sa raksha hung | om ma raksha | ma ra hung hung bharaya dha ma ma yé | dha
ke tsa ra ya pé
dak la jungwa ngapö dra shé jom shing yongsu kyob
Defeat the threats posed by the five elements and always protect us!
om agani dhara shama raya saching matra kreya naya pé | nakpo shighu taya | mataya mel mel shi
shi soha | ayur yute akur shihale | sasutri pé | om om hung ke ram te pé | dhadha nama
sara masaté | daha nana hung hung shi shim el mel nakpo shi | purhé niha hana soha | shidha
lama dusé pé | me ah | raksha sima duyé | nakpo shisa mayé ah na pé | guma guté nakpo shi
|
om hung sarva raksha hung | dhadha nadha ho | mehé maho raksha bé | shi shi dül dül saha lhen
| om namo buddhaya | namo dharmaya | nama sangaya | ah nen té | tedyata | aka rana sé |
sabha sapra dharma nisa | sarva tatha | om shodha bibusha | bimalé tsalé | rulu rulu | bishata
| menta | om lam mum | sara dzayé soha | om traya mig tiryé soha | om tramalé soha |
om tram bhela rajayé soha | om kham nyer rayé soha

dakchak khor dang chepa la
For us, our family and friends:
mitünpa yi chok nam ni
May all misfortune be ended,
kalpa mé yi sekpa tar
Just as when an eon is consumed by apocalyptic flames
tamché dé yi möla jor
And everything is instantly auspicious.
dödön dawa gyé zhin pel
May our virtue increase like the waxing moon.

gyujor yöndak khor ché kyi
For our patrons and benefactors, and their families and friends:
ma lung kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the mother’s luck element.4
bu lung kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the child’s luck element.
nöjin pa tsé trokpa dok
Prevent yakṣas from stealing our parents’ life-span.
sinmo mi ru dzuwa dok
Prevent rākṣasīs from disguising themselves  as humans.
sinpo sha kyang da pen dok
Prevent rākṣasīs from hunting deer and wild asses.5
lung lam khorwa rulok dok
Prevent the reversal of the cycle of our luck and fortune.
lü kyi khorlo zhikpa dok
Prevent the decline of our subtle body.
wangtang zé kha yul nyé dok
Prevent the deterioration of our influence, our sustenance, our land.
lung té gyaltsen chakpa dok
Prevent the victory banner of luck6 from being torn down.
la yi gyab ten yarwa dok
Prevent the dissipation of our life-force.
kham kyi lokpa ralwa dok
Prevent the coat of our elements from being torn asunder.7
rang kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by personal obstacles.8
tün sum gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the three compatible signs.9
dün zur gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the seventh-removed aspect.10
dra ngen gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by hostile forces.11
zhi shé kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the fourth-removed adversarial aspect.12
chok ngen gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious directions.13
dü chö kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent the ‘cutting influence of demons’.14
dré ngé tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the ‘five demons’.
lü ché kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by ‘corporal punishment’.
nam gö tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious constellations.15
sa gö tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by inauspicious configurations.16
shé kö tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by deadly combinations.
pung gyö gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by calamities.17
dütsö kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the hours.18
nya ngen gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from suffering.
chak zhi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from the four iron years.19
mé gyé kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from the eight fire years.
ngen lung kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from bad luck.

dakchak khor dang chepa la
For us, our family and friends:
pamé gen gyi dré chen gyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by enraged ancestral spirits.
lo kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle years.
da kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle months.
zhak kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstacle days.
za kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstructing foods.
dü kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances that stem from obstructing hours.
dü kak gi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by obstacle-creating demons.
za dang karmé tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the planets and stars.
nyimé tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the sun.
dawé tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by the moon.
dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the ‘tomb-sign obstacles’.20
sok dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the vitality element.21
lü dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the body element.
wangtang dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the destiny element.
lung ta dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the tomb-sign obstacles of the luck element.
na mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the disease-sign obstacles.
shi mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from meeting the death-sign obstacles.
sok la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the vitality element.22
lung ta la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the luck element.
lü la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the body element.
wangtang la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the destiny element.
kham la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspects of all the elements.
lo la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the year.
dawa la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the month.
zhak la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the day.
dütsö la dra darwa dok
Avert the enemy aspect of the hour.
rendö kyi tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances caused by our hopes and desires.
chung kak ché la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of the greater obstructing the lesser.
jé kak bang la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of citizens obstructing their leaders.
bang kak jé la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of leaders obstructing their citizens.
pa kak bu la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of sons obstructing their fathers.
bu kak pala tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of fathers obstructing their sons.
khyowö chungma la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of wives obstructing their husbands.
chungmé kak khyowo la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of husbands obstructing their wives.
mé kak bumo la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of daughters obstructing their mothers.
bumö kak ma la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of mothers obstructing their daughters.
mingpö kak singmo la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of sisters obstructing their brothers.
singmö kak mingpo la tsubpa dok
Prevent disturbances of brothers obstructing their sisters.

dak khor dang chepa la
For us, our family and friends:
li khen dü da penpa dok
Prevent the ‘demons that shoot arrows’ between the li and khen trigrams.23
khor la ching dum drilwa dok
Prevent the ‘entanglement’ among us.24
da zin dri pur debpa dok
Prevent the ‘clashing of swords and stakes’ between the dva and the zin trigram.25
ging zin dung nak nolwa dok
Prevent the ‘crossing of black spears’ between the ging and zin trigrams.26
parkha gyé kyi gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles of the eight trigrams.27
mewa gü gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles of the nine numeric squares.
lö gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from encountering any of the nine-multiple obstacles.
chewa gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent those who are older from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
chungwa gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent those who are younger from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
bümé gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent women from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
khyé'u gu mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent men from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles.
dur mik tu tsüpa dok
Prevent us from encountering the nine-multiple obstacles that coincide with a tomb sign.28
genpa la chak chewa gyechu tsa chikpa dok
Avert the eighty-one great adversities for older men.29
kyepa dar ma la chak chewa sumchu tsa dünpa dok
Avert the thirty-seven great adversities for younger men.
jipa la chak chewa gu tok tu babpa dok
Avert the nine great adversities for young boys.
bümé genpa la chak chewa drukchu tsa chikpa dok
Avert the sixty-one great adversities for older women.
bumo zhönpa la chak chewa zhibchu zhé gupa dok
Avert the forty-nine great adversities for younger women.
bumo chungwa la chak chewa nyishu tsa ngapa dok
Avert the twenty-five great adversities for young girls.
mé po druk tok tu kung sa chinpa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the earth constitution with the male fire
dragon sign.30
u chu khampa chinpa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the water constitution with the male fire
dragon sign.
u dümo shang tok tu chinpa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the iron constitution with the female water
ox sign.31
shing chakpa mé mo luk tok tu chinpa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the wood and iron constitutions with the
female fire sheep sign.
da dang sa khyi trepa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the dva trigram with the earth dog sign.
kham dang mé mo luk trepa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the kham trigram with the female fire sheep
sign.
samo lang tok tu dri go jewa dok
Prevent the ‘breaching the gates with swords’ for the female earth ox sign.
kham dang chak po druk trepa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the khon trigram with the male iron dragon
sign.
khön dang chak po khyi trepa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the gin trigram with the male iron dog sign.
gin dang chakmo luk trepa dok
Prevent the obstacles that stem from the meeting of the zon trigram with the female iron sheep
sign.
zin dang chu po khyi tok dü nam bab kyi gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘descent of demons from the sky’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li
trigram and the male water dog sign.32
zön dang chumo lang nyo bok dri shom gyi gu mik dok
Prevent ‘madness and hostility’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the zon trigram and
the female water ox sign.
li dang shing po druk tok tu dü nam bab kyi gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘descent of demons from the sky’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li
trigram and the male wood dragon sign.
kham dang mé lang yu treng takpa chepé gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘breaking of the turquoise necklace’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the
kham trigram and the fire ox sign.
khen dang sa po druk na zö bu ché gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘breaking of promises and children dying’ when the multiple of nine coincides with
the khen trigram and the male earth dog sign.
da dang samo lukmo rab ché kyi gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘breaking of the maternal family line’ when the multiple of nine coincides with
the dva trigram and the female earth sheep sign.
khön dang chak po khyi changmo ngu zuk jepé gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘female wolf causing grievance’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the khon
trigram and the male iron dog sign.
li dang chakmo lang khyimdak doksar babpé gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘householder falling off a cliff’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the li
trigram and the female iron ox sign.
zön dang chu po druk né ngo jungwé gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘sudden emergence of disease’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the zon trigram
and the male water dragon sign.
zin dang chumo luk khyimdak mo drir chiwé gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘death of the female householder due to a knife accident’ when the multiple of nine
coincides with the zin trigram and the female water sheep sign.
gin dang shing po khyi bu jung tang lhung rab ché kyi gu mik dok
Prevent the ‘breaking of the family line by a child falling to the ground’ when the multiple
of nine coincides with the gin trigram and the male wood dog sign.
kham dang shingmo lang yuk sa nam bab kyi gu mik dok
Prevent ‘widowhood’ when the multiple of nine coincides with the kham trigram and the female
wood ox sign.
gu dangpo nyönmong tang khol gyi bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the first multiple of nine—‘overpowered by afflictions.’
gu nyi chobgyé pa ngal nak jungwé bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the second multiple of nine (eighteen)—‘emergence from
a dark womb.’
gu sum nyer dünpa dri ro gor kyel gyi bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the third multiple of nine (twenty-seven)—‘the deliverance
of weapons, corpses and money’.
gu zhi so drukpa jé densa trokpé bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the fourth multiple of nine (thirty-six)—‘robbing the
lord’s residence’.
gu nga zhé ngapa nam kyi nga zor gyi bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the fifth multiple of nine (forty-five)—‘the spirit lord
Ngazor’.33
gu druk ngabchu tsa zhipa polha ngur bö kyi bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the sixth multiple of nine (fifty-four)—‘the growl of
the father guardian deity’.
gu dün drukchu tsa sumpa drir shi dur go trukpé bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the seventh multiple of nine (sixty-three)—‘death by knife
and rattling the cemetery gates.’
gu gyé dünchu dön nyipa dangwa mang la jampa nyungwé bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the eighth multiple of nine (seventy-two)—‘little love
and much anger’.
gu gu gyé chu gya chikpa tsön gyi jakpa khyim né dön bü nöpa dok
Prevent children from being harmed by the ninth multiple of nine (eighty-one)—‘the prisoner
exiting the house’.

dakchak khor dang chepa nam
For us, our family and friends:
gu mik dur na döpa dok
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘residing in the cemetery’.
gu mik pur kyi debpa dok
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘the clashing of stakes.’34
gu mik ching dum drilwa dok
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘entanglement.’35
chak kyi gu mik dri dang mel dangwa dok
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘death by knife.’
mé gu mik kam né yam né döpa dok
Avert the nine-multiple fire obstacle, ‘contagious and preexisting diseases.’
shing gi gu mik lobur yé drok yongwa dok
Avert the nine-multiple wood obstacle, ‘sudden primordial bewitchers.’36
chü gu mik nya ngen chu né yongwa dok
Avert the nine-multiple water obstacle, ‘the coming of fierce water diseases.’
sé gu mik chi tib kyi né jungwa dok
Avert the nine-multiple earth obstacle, ‘the disease of discomfort.’
kham kyi gu mik dur du tsüpa dok
Avert the nine-multiple space obstacle, ‘the entrance into the cemetery.’
gu mik kyen gyi gomo dok
Avert the nine-multiple obstacle, ‘the gate of conditions.’
lhé mi tsong gi mi tsongpa dok
Prevent the human-trading gods from selling humans.
dü mi nyo yi mi nyöpa dok
Prevent the human-acquiring demons from purchasing humans.
lü kyi ten pur chungpa dok
Prevent the body from being pierced at the stake.37
sok gi jönshing chakpa dok
Prevent the felling of the tree of vitality.
wangtang gi rawa ralwa dok
Prevent the fence of destiny from being destroyed.
lung té gyaltsen chakpa dok
Prevent the victory banner of luck from being torn down.
lo gyalpö den shampa dok
Prevent the arrangement of the throne of the king of the year.
dawa lönpö drö jepa dok
Prevent the ministers of the month from holding council.
zhak mak mi mak shampa dok
Prevent the soldiers of the day from going to war.
dütsö tsöncha tabpa dok
Prevent construction of the weapon of the hour.
parkhé a tangché pa dok
Prevent the weakening of the trigrams.
khongpa sin gyi zöpa dok
Prevent our constituents from being devoured by rākṣasas.
dü kyi pung dré bebpa dok
Prevent the descent of disaster-inducing demons.
dré ngaja ra jepa dok
Prevent the five demons from spying on us.
nakpo né tso jukpa dok
Prevent the black demon minister from gaining entry.
dü kyi sha ro ngö su kyangpa dok
Prevent the revival of demonic corpses.
khyim nak khol du tibpa dok
Prevent the suppression of the dark house.
gyawa mang gi lengwa dok
Prevent the hundred mouths from talking.
tong mik mang gi tawa dok
Prevent the thousand eyes from gazing.
dangwa dra yi drok tu chukpa dok
Prevent us from being enslaved by our hated enemies.
jampa nyen gyi jöpa dok
Prevent us from being exposed by our dear friends.
dak ri karpo lé drak ral dok
Prevent the removal of boulders from the sunny white mountain.38
sib ri nakpo lé shing chakpa dok
Prevent the felling of trees in the dark black forest.
mi jé sadak gyalpö ngatang nyampa dok
Prevent the decline of the power of rulers, lords, and kings.
geweshé nyen gyi densa tongpa dok
Prevent the clearance of the spiritual teacher’s residence.
tsünpé dul trim zhikpa dok
Prevent monastic discipline from breaking down.
menpé ché ka lokpa dok
Prevent doctors from making misdiagnoses.
tsi kyi kor go dzolwa dok
Prevent mistaken astrological calculations.
shen rab lha dral tongpa dok
Prevent the clearing of shrines dedicated to Shenrab.39
nam rimpa gü teng né shel gyija khyung shokpa debpa dok
Prevent the crystal garuḍa of the ninth stage of heaven from flapping his wings.40
sa rimpa gü ok né dur pak nakpo khünpa dok
Prevent the black charnel pig of the ninth subterranean layer from grunting.
zang kyi langpo ra darwa dok
Prevent the copper bull from grinding his horns.
pu né dra jungwa dok
Prevent enemies from attacking us from above.
lobur nga né si langpa dok
Prevent the si demons of the past from suddenly appearing.
dursa nyenpo kha jewa dok
Prevent the opening of fearsome charnel grounds.
yé drok sumgya drukchu dok
Prevent the advent of the three hundred and sixty primordial bewitchers.41
lobur gyechu tsa chik dok
Avert the eighty-one accidents.
dön rik tongtrak sumgya dok
Avert the three hundred thousand types of evil spirits.
mi chuk chi yi si ngen dok
Prevent the evil si demons from attacking humans and their livestock.
drong tso drar lang si ngen dok
Prevent the evil si demons from turning our neighbors into enemies.
chok chü dé truk langpa dok
Prevent war from ever arising in any direction.
dü ngen ta si ngenpa dok
Avert the hostile gods and demons of this kaliyuga.
milam tsenma ngenpa dok
Avert bad signs in dreams.
jé ngen jor tsub jekha purkha dok
Avert black magic, sorcery, curses, and witchcraft.
né chepa té tram ngen ngak dok
Avert broken oaths, evil diagrams and wicked spells.
mitün chok nam malü zhi gyur chik
Thus pacify all adversities, without exception.

This concludes the dhāraṇī entitled The ‘Chinese’ Practice of Averting Astrological Obstacles,
as spoken by Noble Mañjuśrī.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. Stefan Mang, ed. Libby Hogg), 2022.

Primary source: “rgya nag skag bzlog.” In gzungs bsdus, vol. 2. Ding ri ba chos rgyan, 1947.
(BDRC MW1KG12113_D14CCD) pp. 468–77.
Secondary source: Gyurme Dorje. 2001. Tibetan Elemental Divination Paintings: Illuminated Manuscript
from the White Beryl of Sangs-rgyas rGya-mtsho with the Moonbeams treatise of Lo-chen
Dharmasri. University of Washington Press. (BDRC W1KG6061. Available online at archive.org.)

Version: 1.1-20220321
↑ The present text contains many terms and references used only in Tibetan astrology (nag rtsis).
In order to give the interested reader a context for these terms and references, our
translation follows the English terminology chosen by Gyurme Dorje, hereafter GD, in his
book Tibetan Elemental Divination Paintings. In this publication Gyurme Dorje explores the
practices of elemental divination (‘byung rtsis) as described in The White Beryl (vaiḍūrya
dkar po) composed by Sangyé Gyatso (1653-1705), the Fifth Dalai Lama’s regent. While hardcopies
of this book are still for sale, the book can also be found as a pdf online at archive.org.
Explanations for many of the key terms used in this translation can be found via
the book’s index and glossary. For a discussion of the origin of astrology and its transmission
to Tibet, see: GD, 11 ff.↑ The following mantra contains both Sanskrit and Tibetan
words and syllables. We have provided a translation and Sanskrit diacritics wherever possible.↑
Reading Tib. gzugs as Tib. gtsug. For a discussion of the Tib. term gtsug lag, rendered
here as astrology, see: GD, 17.↑ Although referred to as ‘luck element or aspect’ (klungs),
in certain situations and in combination with other factors, the ‘luck aspect’ may have
a negative impact (see e.g. GD, 248 & 349).↑ Deer and wild asses are seen as animals particularly
favoured by certain deities.↑ Lungta (klung rta) is translated here as ‘luck’
instead of the more usual ‘wind-horse’.↑ i.e. the elements (khams) that make up our physical
body.↑ According to GD, personal or natural obstacles (rang skeg) “occur when one’s own
year-sign coincides with the present year” (GD, 229).↑ According to GD, the disturbances
caused by the three compatible signs (thun gsum) “occur when one shares an identical luck
element with that of the present year” (GD, 231).↑ According to GD, the seventh-removed aspect
(bdun zur) “is the seventh animal year-sign, counting backwards or forwards from the
sign of the subject’s birth or obstacle year” (GD, 219-31 & 419).↑ Hostile forces (dgra ngan)
may here also refer to astrological ‘enemy relationships’ that can have a negative impact
on an individual. For a chart outlining some of these relationships, see e.g. GD, 181.↑
According to GD, the fourth-removed adversarial aspect “entails calculating the fourth-removed
year-sign, counting forwards or backwards from the present year” (GD, 415 & 428).↑
Certain directions in astrological calculations are deemed inauspicious (see e.g. GD, 128).↑
The ‘cutting influence of demons’ (bdud gcod), the ‘five demons’ (‘dre lnga), and ‘corporal
punishment’ (lus chad) are the names of three particular type of astrological inauspicious
relationships. For explanations, see e.g.: GD, 107-8.↑ In the sky.↑ On the surface of
the earth.↑ GD mentions both four and five calamities (phung gyod) that might affect an
individual during certain inauspicious periods (GD, 188 & 228).↑ This refers especially to
the spirit lords (sa bdag) associated with the hours (GD, 120 & 135–137).↑ See GD, 345-8.↑
Using various astrological methods, the so-called ‘tomb signs’ (dur mig) are calculated.
These mark a certain potentially inauspicious or dangerous period of time for the individual
in question. For an explanation, see: GD 2008, 115-7 & 420.↑ For an explanation of the
four elements of vitality (srog), body (lus), destiny (dbang thang) and luck (klung rta),
see: GD 2008, 68 ff. & glossary.↑ For a mention of these ‘enemy aspects’ (dgra), see e.g.:
GD, 181–183.↑ Here various inauspicious combinations of trigrams (spar kha) are mentioned.
Each outcome has a specific name. For a brief explanation of the eight trigrams (spar kha
brgyad), see: GD, 46 ff. & 420.↑ GD mentions two outcomes that he translates as ‘felt wrapping,’
spelt by GD phying thums gril instead of phying dum gril (GD, 233). This outcome
can also occur when certain trigrams between family members coincide.↑ Since the two trigrams
in question relate to the iron and wood elements, the weapons involved seem to portray
this inauspicious configuration. GD (GD, 233) translates this outcome as ‘piercing of the
dagger’ (gri phur ‘debs).↑ GD mentions this outcome for the combination of the khon and
the kham trigrams (GD, 233).↑ Obstacle periods, mostly years, are calculated by a multiple
of nine (dgu mig). The starting point for the calculation of the multiple of nine depends
upon various astrological factors (GD, 417).↑ The periods of a multiple of nine that coincide
with a tomb sign are especially dangerous.↑ Reading Tib. chags che ba as Tib. chag che
ba. A person may be more prone to certain types of adversity depending on their age and
gender.↑ Based on a person’s constitutional type (rus khams), certain years may bring greater
obstacles (GD, 64 & 65).↑ Tentatively for “‘u ‘dus mo bshang.” Reading bshang as gshang,
that is iron. Following the chart provided by GD (p. 65), the ox year is particularly dangerous
for people who have an iron constitution.↑ The multiple of nine coinciding with one
of the following trigrams and animal signs can cause various mental and physical obstacles,
such as the reduction of an individual’s life-span. In the following list the outcome
of each inauspicious combination has a specific name which describes its outcome either literally
or metaphorically. For an explanation and chart outlining some of these inauspicious
combinations, see GD, 249 ff.↑ The geomantic spirit lord of the soil (GD 2008, 418).↑
Likely the same as the ‘piercing of the dagger’ (gri phur ‘debs) outcome (see GD, 233).↑ See
footnote 24.↑ For primordial bewitchers (ye ‘brog), see: GD 2008, 404.↑ Again, this is
a reference to the four elements of body, vitality, destiny and luck.↑ A play on the words
sunny and shade (gdags srib) which also form the name of a chart employed in astrology (GD,
233).↑ Sherab (gshen rab) is the forefather of the Bön tradition.↑ According to the Bön
tradition, heaven has nine stages and the earth nine subterranean layers.↑ The 360 primordial
bewitchers correspond to the 360 days of the lunar year (GD 2008, 404).